---
title: Interacting with the Environment
---

## Containers

VS Code is now connected to a `container`, a container is an instance of an image which was just created. This image is defined from the `.devcontainer/Dockerfile` which imperatively describes steps to be applied to a base image, in this case `osrf/ros:humble-desktop-full` which is itself based off of Ubuntu 22.04.

VS Code does a lot of heavy lifting and the result is the same UI you might be used to with a few key differences.

In the bottom left you will see `Dev Container: UAS PX4+ROS2` this is similar to the remote development feature of VS Code and lets you know that you are not developing on your host OS.

A container is actually mostly isolated from the entire system, this means that it cannot access you local file system unless we tell it to. We mount the `dev_env` directory to the `~/workspace` path on the container, this shows up in the file explorer on the side bar. Any changes you make here will be reflected if you open this directory on the host system.

Anything you do outside of `~/workspace` (which you can do via the terminal) will contained to the container and will be lost if you rebuild it.

The terminal is also bound to the container and does not interact directly with the host.

## The Terminal

Open the terminal with the default hotkey ``ctrl+` `` (or whatever you're used to), this is the window with which we will interact with the system.

This terminal by default opens `bash` a shell that enables us to command the OS. This is similar to cmd or powershell from Windows, macOS by default uses Zsh which is a superset of bash.

If you have not cloned any repos you will most likely see:

```
bash: /home/uas/workspace/uas_ws/install/local_setup.bash: No such file or directory
```

This is because we do not have a ROS2 colcon workspace setup yet (covered in ROS2 tutorials).

You will see `uas@ros-dev:~/workspace$ `, this is the command prompt where you will write commands. `uas` is the name of the user and is set by the container, `ros-dev` is the hostname of the system and is set by the container. `~/workspace` is the current directory you are in, in UNIX like systems `~` is a shorthand for the "home" directory of the user. On this system this expands to `/home/uas`, this is similar to `C:\Users\<username>` on Windows.

Type `ls` and press enter, you should see a list of files and directories present in the `workspace` directory. As noted before these are actual files from your host OS that the container has been given access to.

Type `cd ..` to go one directory up and press enter, you should now see `uas@ros-dev:~$` you are now in `~` or `/home/uas`. Type the `ls` command again, you will see `workspace` as well as some other directories that are not present on your host system! Type `cd workspace` to go back to where you were before.

`ls` can also be extended with optional arguments. Try `ls -la` you should see that the files have now been printed in a column with additional information on each row, you should also see more files/directories than last time. To learn more about these arguments use the `man` command (short for manual). Try `man ls` to see all possible options you can use. Nearly all commands have an associated man page that you can read.

This wiki and most external tutorials will provide commands for you to run, but if you'd like to learn what exactly these commands here are some places to start:

- [https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/command-line-for-beginners#1-overview](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/command-line-for-beginners#1-overview)
- [https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/bash-scripting-tutorial-linux-shell-script-and-command-line-for-beginners](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/bash-scripting-tutorial-linux-shell-script-and-command-line-for-beginners/)

Tip: files in the container can be opened in VS Code with `code <filename>`. Try it with `code ~/PX4-Autopilot/README.md`, this opens the PX4 README which was installed to `~` by the container! You can also use tools like `vim` and `nano` to edit files from the command line, but they will not be covered here.

## Package Installation

On Ubuntu and most Linux distributions installation and management of software is done through a `package manager`. On Ubuntu the `apt` command can be used to interact with this system.

Try typing `speedtest-cli` you should see `bash: speedtest-cli: command not found` this is because we need to install it. Try `sudo apt install speedtest-cli` to install. (type `y` and enter if prompted)

Now if you type `speedtest-cli` you will get an internet speed test. We can install most programs you can think of this way, if you'd like to view the official list of packages see here: [https://packages.ubuntu.com/jammy/](https://packages.ubuntu.com/jammy/)

??? note "sudo?"
    Just as Windows sometimes needs administrator privileges to install software, on most Linux distributions package management must be done with elevated permissions. We call a user with such privileges a "super user". The `sudo` or "super user do" command enables a normal user to run a command with elevated permissions. In this container the `uas` user has been granted passwordless `sudo`, on most other Linux systems you will find that you will need to enter a password.

If you are coming from Windows `apt` is similar to `winget`, `scoop`, or `choco`. On macOS the equivalent is `homebrew`.

## The Simulation

Before you start you will have to enable `X11` pass through, `X11` is a windowing system that allows programs to draw to the screen and is how the container will create windows on our host computer.

For Linux the container is already setup to mount the `X11` socket and configure `$DISPLAY`, but you may have to run `xhost +local:docker` if nothing shows up when you run the simulation. (this command allows non-network local connects to access the X server)

For Windows see: [https://medium.com/@potatowagon/how-to-use-gui-apps-in-linux-docker-container-from-windows-host-485d3e1c64a3](https://medium.com/@potatowagon/how-to-use-gui-apps-in-linux-docker-container-from-windows-host-485d3e1c64a3)

For macOS try: [https://gist.github.com/sorny/969fe55d85c9b0035b0109a31cbcb088](https://gist.github.com/sorny/969fe55d85c9b0035b0109a31cbcb088)

The `dev_env` comes preconfigured with a task for running the default simulation. Open command palette `ctrl+shift+p` and search for `Tasks: Run Task`, press enter and choose `Launch simulator`. This will spawn three terminals that will open two windows, the Gazebo sim and QGroundControl. See `.vscode/tasks.json` if you'd like to see what shell commands get run.

If you pan around the scene with your mouse and you are getting more than 10fps then the container is using your GPU correctly. If panning is not smooth and your RTF (real time factor) represented as a percentage in the bottom right is more than 80% than your container is not using your GPU correctly. If you are getting low frames and your RTF is also low than your computer is bad or you have not allocated enough resources to your container.

??? note "GPU support"
    See the `README.md` in the `dev_env` repo to check if someone has already written instructions/tips for your system topology. <br>
    See the `WSL2` note back on [Developer Environment](./1._Developer_Environment.md) <br>
    Otherwise a good a place to start is to search `docker <operating system> <amd/intel/nvidia> <desktop/laptop> gpu`.


If you want to fly the drone you can use the commands on the left of the app like `Takeoff`, after the drone takes off you can also click on places on the map and tell the drone to fly there. If the simulator does not let you take off please resolve the warnings.

You can also control the drone with a virtual joystick (a little difficult to use without a touch screen) to enable go to `Application Settings > Fly View > Virtual Joystick`.

??? note "Status warnings"
    The top left section of the status bar is yellow because we have flight warnings, the simulator will probably let you take off without resolving them but if you would to anyways: <br>
    Click on the `Ready To Fly` text in yellow. Under `Overall Status` you should see `No manual control input`, you are getting this warning because you have no joystick connected to the simulator. Open this drop down and select the `COM_RC_IN_MODE` parameter in the blue text, change it to `Stick input disabled` and press save (you should only use this setting in sim). <br>
    If you see any other warnings try waiting or restarting the sim, otherwise check the forums.

??? note "Physical joystick"
    You can use various controllers with QGroundControl as a "joystick" to control the drone, most RC controllers should be detected by default. See [https://github.com/UTAT-UAS/dev_env?tab=readme-ov-file#joystick](https://github.com/UTAT-UAS/dev_env?tab=readme-ov-file#joystick) for enabling `/dev` pass through.

When ready kill the simulator (close the windows and/or press `ctrl+c` in the terminal windows).

## Next

[Recommended Tutorials](./3._Recommended_Tutorials.md)

